quite a few different seemingly random
circumstances
inspired me to record this video or put
in my mind the notion to make such a
video
one of them being that youtube
apparently at random uh suggested to me
a response to my channel i think from a
couple years ago from another small
youtuber who was one of the chorus of
young men
who bitterly denounced me for suggesting
that he
ought to quit video games of seth medium
in particular i mean that all of us
would be better off would be living
better lives with the if we really look
seriously at how many hours and how many
minutes we're spending on things like
playing video games and if you've been
to this channel before you know this is
connected to my
critique of my questioning of
what is the meaning of life what it
means to lead a meaningful life etc
and i have definite answers
but i think the most significant part of
those discussions is that i lead my
audience
in reflecting on those questions on
formulating those questions and applying
them to their own lives even if you come
to a completely different set of answers
from mine
just the process
of asking yourself the question
seriously is gonna lead to changes in
your life it really is and whether it
leads to completely quitting video games
or resolving to only play video games
for one or two hours a week or something
i think any and every notion of a
meaningful life is going to be
incompatible with playing video games as
a habit and numerous other
habits and distractions as well the
question of what you're being distracted
from
is indeed a good one and sailing to this
conversation anyway seemingly at random
while i was at the gym this evening
youtube recommended this
video to me
and i just say
if you do book reviews on youtube often
not always often the best time to do a
book review is when you're halfway
through the book
by the time you get to the end of the
book
do two videos even do three make
multiple videos while you're reading the
book and you'll you won't regret it
because the things you were thinking
about and worried about and wanting to
talk about on camera when you were
halfway through the book you won't have
them in mind anymore when you get to the
end of the book when you're when you're
finished and if you record at the end of
the book often you'll have an
exasperated feeling anyway so i was
listening to this video
and i hit pause i don't even think i was
halfway through
so this is a similar kind of response he
said something i think is as it sparks
this video it's worth speaking to even
if it's kind of completely inaccurate
and unfair and wrong
he characterizes my position as follows
he says well you know
isil mazzard claims that
playing video games
is a waste of time
and what does he contrast to playing
video games research
now this is a misrepresentation of
argument but i still think it's worth
answering like i don't just simply say
there are two paths in front of you in
life one is video games and one is one
is research i think that
a meaningful life and the meaningful the
meaning of life involves a lot of
learning for us
and learning involves research
so research is part of the answer but
this isn't some simple question where i
say instead of video games do research
that's the way he characterized my
audience that's the way he characterizes
my position in contrast to his own and
fair enough then the next plank of his
argument is to say well
research could be
more meaningful
than playing video games but it could
not be
and his choice of example is fascinating
to me he says let's say for example you
are a white english-speaking american
living in the united states of america
and you do research on the history
of the border conflict between china and
india
now i would assume this this video is
not new i'd assume he mentioned that
example because at that time i'd made
videos talking about this i have made
some videos time with the history
involved
and he goes on to say well this research
would be totally meaningless to your
life it would be not rewarding for you
at all
this is just mind-blowing to me and the
problem is
that this guy is so young
he's so inexperienced
that he has no idea what he's talking
about he has no idea how meaningful and
rewarding it would be for him
especially because he is a white
american who has no connection to the
history of china and no connection to
the history of india to do research
about the history of the china india
border conflict and he cannot imagine
how so i don't know let's say he's 19 or
20 years old between age 20 and age 30
that research he might do in three
months
how it doesn't just become meaningful
for a short time in his life but it
remains meaningful and it comes up again
and again and again between the age of
20 and the age of 30 between the age of
30 and the age of 40 his whole life long
like this is my point i'm not faulting
him saying that he's like incorrect or
made a misjudgment of something saying
that very often when you're talking to
young people
you're talking to people
who have never done any research on any
subject whatsoever and have then never
lived with those findings lived with the
outcomes of that research live with the
results of that research it's such way
they understand how it enriches
everything in their life right now i'll
give a quick uh contrast to this and
i'll come back to the same example
many angles from this and by the way
welcome to everyone in the audience and
i'm happy to
chitchat with you guys reply to you guys
also i know that many people who are my
regular viewers today are people who
think a lot about this and think about
how they can lead a meaningful life and
how they can grow
intellectually ethically and and so on
unfortunately i'm disappointed that
incredibly few people on us actually
want to make a difference in the world
politically that's my disappointment
my audience is not radical enough to sue
me
but i do have a lot of genuine
intellectual dissonance in my audience
and i appreciate i appreciate the help
of that i have a lot of people have good
intentions in that respect however when
it comes to actually changing the world
i don't yet have the warehouse of talent
i might be might be hoping for uh in
that respect okay um
melissa and i had a conversation a few
days ago with another young man and he
is 25
yeah
and he was saying to me and i can relate
to his situation very well he's at a
world famous university in germany
and he was saying to me that he actually
finds it embarrassing that when he's
just standing around having
conversations with people in germany his
level of knowledge about history and
politics the result of the research he's
done over the last 10 years
um it results in people just being kind
of astonished at him and saying you know
how do you know all this stuff why are
you so elected and people saying things
that are incredibly flattering and
praising him now i point out this is a
very particular situation so i was in
the situation at the university of
toronto supposedly the best university
of canada i was in the situation at the
university of cambridge the university
of oxford i've been i've been on the
campuses of elite universities i was not
a student at cambridge i was just giving
lectures these places i was
chit chatting with people and so on
um hobnobbing you might say
but you know you're at a situation where
everyone on that campus is at a certain
level of every addition
but they're aware of the level of every
addition that's expected of them
and they're aware that they don't have
it
and then they meet someone who really
exceeds their expectations their
expectations of other students maybe
also there are expectations of the
professors right and there's this real
kind of wow fact wow you know and they
it is pathetic but they just don't
expect it they don't expect to meet
again 25 is not young it's really not
you know they don't expect to meet a 25
year old man who has a sophisticated
nuanced perspective on the history of
the vietnam war i'm just giving randoms
has a sophisticated perspective on
napoleon napoleon bonaparte and that
period of french tribunalism whatever
whatever these gonna be just someone who
has really read and studied and learned
things about a whole bunch of different
chapters of political science and
history
and this particular guy he also knows a
lot about the hard sciences which are
not not the examples i'm using he's also
very well educated for example about the
theory of evolution and the history of
sciences um connected to that so this is
a guy who i mean you know i'm aware i've
influenced him tremendously in the last
five years uh to some extent he's living
by his own philosophy and to some extent
he's living by mine and to some extent
there's an overlap between the two but
he is one of the people who's really
taken a sense of direction and
motivation from this youtube channel and
from conversations with me and so on i'm
aware of this this is not an independent
case study
um and you know i've also been through a
lot of those same kind of situations
i've had people telling me i'm a genius
and being amazed by me and stuff and i'm
i'm a critic of
put it this way that's a picture that's
almost entirely produced by the frame
you know what i mean people kind of
start with this framing and then fill in
the blanks like okay i understand you
perceive me as a genius because like
this is the situation this is the
scenario that creates this expectation
and this perception
anyway it is what it is and you know
like you you could look at even the same
example 25 year old guy in a major
university in in germany and you could
say look you should expect everybody to
be like this guy like everybody at this
age on this campus you should be
disappointed with all the other people
and reviling them as idiots you should
be insulting and upgrading the other
students because all they do is spend
their time playing video games going to
nightclubs in germany by the way
prostitution is legal so they have a
very high rate of young men going to
sleep with prostitutes while they're in
university many many countries is
illegal and they do it but really in
german you have men and women but you
know young young men and and women in in
university living dissolute
self-indulgent lives and making
incredibly little intellectual process
and just doing the study that's required
to pass the test to get there to get
their degree
and so on now
you know in the conversation then
just a couple days ago you know i said
many things to him but one of the things
that emphasized to him again and again
was
you know sorry i should just finish that
part of the answer he said that he feels
that he's not a genius he feels that
he's not extraordinarily intelligent he
feels that he's not in intrinsically or
innately superiorities of people
he feels that what he knows and what
he's able to say for himself is just the
result of the work he did over the last
10 years that you do 10 years of reading
and 10 years of research even if it's
kind of at random oh i'm interested in
napoleon i'm interested in the vietnam
war even if you're just picking these
these things up piece by piece and you
start connecting the pieces and learning
from them and he also i i forget to what
extent this is the result of my youtube
channel but he's also now done some
reading from ancient greece and rome i
forget to what extent i influenced him
in that or he might have had that
interest first or whatever but certainly
my youtube channel encouraged him so you
start reading some aristotle and some
thucydides and and this kind of thing
and putting these things together you
know before you know it um you know it
it adds up to much more than the sum of
its parts you start making shrewd
analytical judgments contrasting one
thing to another one but he he said that
he doesn't feel like he's a genius he
just feels that this is the result of
how he has been living his life
for the last 10 years this is what i
said yes but you cannot imagine
how much more rewarding it is in the
next 10 years that's what you have no
idea about like these people you're
talking about
they can't imagine how they'd feel if
they were in your shoes if they had done
like if they're also 25 if they had done
in the last 10 years what you've done
they can't imagine that but like you
can't imagine where i'm at you can't
imagine how rewarding this research is
the outcomes of this research and you
never forget it
it never leaves you you carry it with
you for the rest of your life it is
tremendously powerful tremendously
meaningful way i'm gonna make a little
bit of a digression here that's not it's
not too much of a digression uh i did
not play any video games today
uh
but
if i did yesterday or the day before i
played i played a video game uh for the
original 8-bit uh famicom
but so if i sat down and played that
game again today i can shout out the
famicom gameplay i remember i played
again melissa was boiling water you were
making soup or something in the kitchen
and partly to amuse her and to pass like
five minutes i started playing this
8-bit video game and it was it was so i
played one level of that game so i don't
even know if that was five minutes just
being it could have been three minutes
but one level of an 8-bit family game
and i chit-chatted while i was doing it
i was chit-chatting with melissa she was
back here boiling water and stuff that's
no big deal okay
there is no way i could stretch that to
just one hour of playing video games
there are so many books in this
apartment
i really want to read now
part of this all you guys can relate to
even if you're watching this at 18 years
old or 16 years old you know what it's
like to have a book you want to read
okay
there are books in this apartment
i really want to read that i've already
read before
okay
and that's harder to relate to
that when you get to 40 years old
going back and reading aristotle again
it's different now
because of all the other research you've
done all the other things you've learned
all the other things that have been
connected to it and like dude i think i
could read aristotle's politics again
today
and i think i could read it again five
years from now and uh sorry i'm not
going to get into all the stuff i've
been reading and you know why that's so
meaningful and while that's so rewarding
but like i'm not saying this to insult
anyone i'm saying for real whether you
are 18 years old 20 years old 30 years
old or 4 years old depending on how much
experience you have with with research
with this means nonfiction this doesn't
mean reading novels doesn't mean reading
comic books sorry you know
but like you really can't imagine the
way in which it makes your life more
rewarding and more meaningful every day
the way it makes my life more meaningful
while i am in the shower
like not thinking about anything in
particular the way it makes my life more
meaningful rewarding when i'm sitting
and looking out the window
and the way in which i'm positively
motivated like if i am going to play a
video game for five minutes
while i'm playing that video game for
just those five minutes
my mind is wondering and it's not
wandering to like oh
big breasted women or something it's not
water dude it's not wandering to oh i
wish i owned a fancy red sports car no
like i am really thinking about research
i want to do
and reason and things connected to
research i've done in the past there's a
world of like material there you know of
thoughts and ideas and passions and
concerns that i actively want to expand
and work on you know basically all the
time
um look there are only so many hours in
the day when you're really alert when
you when you're really focused but
that's the greatest tragedy about
something like video games video games
are what you do you know you have to be
alert and focused you don't play video
games while you sleep it either reduces
the number of hours you're sleeping or
reduces the number of hours you're doing
something else meaningful like like
research and so on
um
okay great great comment uh from plant
plant-based powered in the audience
quote you're obsessed with talking about
video games you know you want to play
video games so i don't think this is a
big uh
i don't think this is a big digression
uh here you know but um
so i've said this in different contexts
in different ways i can talk about in a
kind of sad and demoralized way and i
can talk about a kind of joyful way all
right um
video games cannot make me happy the way
they made me happy as a small child now
i have a daughter i haven't seen her for
years
but i mean okay i give two great
examples with my daughter i remember my
daughter just seeing a cat it's not
worth telling the whole center she saw a
cat through a window and you know the
cat yawned
so you know that my cat yawns it shows
off its teeth and it might have been her
first time ever seeing that like she was
so little she was so young and she was
just so delighted and so trans and so
overwhelmed by this and she kicked her
little feet and was smiling like she was
so happy just to see a a cat or a kitten
whatever it was and see it yawning you
know and she's so overwhelmed by this
okay i can never feel that way again
there are all kinds of things that are
overwhelming
when you're a child and you know i do
remember what it was like uh to play a
sega master system game when i was child
i remember also
the sense of excitement in in opening
one or purchasing one like the
acquisition of the video game is
something that's something separate okay
there is just no way video games can
ever do that for me anymore and
if you regret that
you know what are you really saying you
you want to regress to a childlike level
of simplicity is that really what you
you want to do and if i could sell you a
drug that would let you regress like
when you're high on this drug when
you're under the influence of this drug
you're so simple-minded that you can
enjoy playing video games that way again
as a child or you can enjoy staring at a
cat while it yawns the way a small child
does you know i think for a very short
period of time some really intense
mind-altering drugs have that kind of
that kind of effect on people you know
they reduce you to a childlike state of
of mental dysfunction it can't last long
and you build up tolerance and
bad things ensue would you want that
would you want to regress to
a childlike enjoyment but look you know
sorry i don't think you're new to my
channel plant-based power but i have
made many many videos talking about
video games i do not trivialize the
impact they've had on my life and i do
not trivialize the impact they've had on
other people's lives i once did an
interview with someone who was here on
youtube
and he said well you know why do you
talk about video games this way as
opposed to
his example was adult coloring books
other hobbies people have that take up
time and it was cut very short that he
immediately changed the type i said okay
tell me do you know anyone who dropped
out of university because they were
addicted to adult coloring books and
sort of right away yeah well
let me let me shift uh
let me shift the topic um
anyway but look you know video games had
a huge impact on my life i don't know
anyone
for whom coloring books or assembling
puzzles out of puzzle pieces had a huge
impact on their life of course videos of
course some people get addicted to
gambling like with a deck of cards you
know but for my generation and for the
generations younger than me
video game addiction and video game
playing are epidemic levels um so i'm
just going to give a link to a video if
you guys don't know my back catalog of
this my whole point is not to trivialize
this
um that's the type that's a video titled
quitting video games colon the problem
is profound not just a waste of time and
that it's taking it seriously
so that's my whole approach
um
you know
so look someone else in the audience
says so again
the point here is not that that
video games are the only problem in the
world they are in a tremendously
important problem so someone else in the
audience called uh revi says quote to be
honest he's had the same issues with uh
porn
and he says ultimately comes down to use
a ton of energy so just say this to
really uh uh directly but to anyone else
down just feels that way so you know i
can't relate to that because i can't
imagine watching pornography for two
hours
like
two hours really like uh and i i believe
i think there are real statistics in the
internet to back this up i think for i
like the vast majority of men if there's
something that interests me that i'm
gonna look up in terms of porn it's
going to be five minutes it's gonna be a
very short
fleeting interest and you know um i mean
i do watch the news i watch all kinds of
things on the news and you guys know
from my youtube channel i follow certain
kinds of controversies within
uh youtube news so to speak um you know
that i that i analyze and comment on my
youtube channel every so often it's
mentioned that someone has started doing
pornography like you know someone who is
a youtuber or someone who sometimes not
and i think oh okay i wonder what kind
of thing they're doing and i and i look
it up to give you an example
never once have i felt fascinated and
then watched their pornography for even
one hour let alone two hours and with
video games we're talking about 40 hours
30 we're talking about hundreds of hours
going into this right most of the time
it's just kind of like oh okay that's
interesting and sometimes also like the
news is misrepresenting it like the news
says that this person is doing porn but
you look it up and they're really just
posing in a bikini like it's not really
important and sometimes the news says
somebody's doing porn you look at
everything yeah that's hardcore porn
like you know so sometimes it's just
kind of
you know and sometimes you locate and
think wow that person is much less
attractive than i thought they were you
know and sometimes the opposite but no
so
i'm just saying rarely i understand
where you're coming from but i think i'm
in the majority
where i'm just not susceptible to that
being a significant loss of of time in
my life uh and now you know by contrast
you know my relationships with women uh
all of them real real women not
pornography real women you know the
number of hours i pour into talking to
caring for building a relationship with
the women of my life the women i have
sex with to people it's an enormous
number of hours a huge amount of time
and so breaking up with any of them like
that side of my life the relationship
side and the commitment side and the
breakup side you know that's a huge huge
investment of many many hours so again
i'm not obviously i'm not making some
kind of qualitative comparison here just
a quantitative one so it doesn't make
sense for me to offer that kind of um
that kind of analysis of of of porn so
railway says that yes he did have uh
he did have the experience of porn being
one hour to three hours a day for many
years of his of his life okay so it's
interesting here but there's got to be
some other youtube channel that
addresses that you know for me i can't i
can't relate to that at all and the
other thing i'd ask is i don't know were
you listening to the news
why you looked at
like for me like even though i'm someone
with a very high sex drive and i'm very
interested in sex i'm interested in
people i'm interested having meaningful
relationships women like
if i'm listening to
a podcast about the history of napoleon
while looking through porn or something
you know that's that's kind of one thing
but like they're sorry this obviously
relates to my overall intellectual
character but i i absolutely can't
imagine it being interested in that so
look you know
hey a legitimate open open question do
some people
drop out of university because of porn
i'm guessing in a country the size the
united states there were a few like i
don't know if there are five guys a year
or something you know how many people
ruin their university education because
of porn addiction maybe one two three
four finally i think there might be a
couple
however the reality with video games
this is at epidemic levels of of
millions and millions of people so
that's why we talk so much with video
games but i do also talk about love and
romance i talk about all kinds of other
things in life meaning meaningful and
meaningless
um so it's not no unfortunately it looks
like that guy plant-based power
i think he just thought he'd insult me
and then
uh and then leave the audience well it's
too bad where'd you go man
let's see i guess he can dish it out but
he can't take it
all right so look um
i was making this point to this 25 year
old friend of mine who's at a university
in germany
where you know for him it's good news
for him this isn't like a caution or a
reproach or an insult i'm saying well
look you can't imagine how much better
it gets you can't imagine how much more
rewarding the life of the mind gets like
you know you can't imagine how wonderful
it is to wake up in the morning and be
me and you know for him too i just say
like 10 years from now the fruit the
result of this level of you know
one of those fundamental things is
developing your own curiosity
honing your sense of curiosity
sharpening your sense of doubt you know
having this kind of analytical doubting
mind where you you doubt the things
around you all the time you actually
investigate them and do research and and
come to conclusions you know so i'm
saying to him positively you can't
imagine how how much better this gets
when you have another 10 years you know
behind you um
okay the shifting focus to this other
young man i i don't know i think he's
about 20 years old
uh who was defending playing video games
by suggesting that this kind of research
doing research about the history of the
border conflict between india and china
would be totally meaningless and not
rewarding for a white american unlike
playing video games right in his case i
have to say the same thing but it's with
a bit more of a harsh tone of
condemnation or what i have to say to
him is
you
have no idea
how rewarding it would be for you
yes you to get off your ass get off the
couch and really research the history of
the china indian border conflict you
don't know
and you don't even have something else
you've researched that you could compare
it to and you are i mean you are really
speaking as a fatuous blithering idiot
if you even if you can even imagine
that playing pac-man for 40 hours or
playing world of warcraft for 40 hours
could ever be as rewarding for you short
term or long term as studying the
example you chose not an example i chose
if you really hit the books and study
the history of the the china india
border coffee now i want to say i do
understand his sense of estrangement
from it but he doesn't understand
especially when you're young this video
is advice for young men and some of it's
already a lot of this is male centric
this is not a gender equal video
this is really done about young men not
young women okay
especially as a young man you don't know
how important the issue of detachment is
so yeah it may seem to you like india is
a far off a strange place you don't
really know any of the political leaders
you don't have any kind of emotional
attachment any kind of any kind of bias
but as a young man especially you don't
realize what an advantage that is so
let's just take a this is a digression
that is not in any way of digression
this is a question that directly
contributes to this conversation if i
sit down and talk to a young man
about uh mohandas gandhi this is the
political leader often referred to as
mahatma gandhi right
mahatma gandhi mohandas gotti now
most so if you talk to a 20 year old man
a white american man he either knows
nothing about gandhi or he has seen some
short clips of a fictional movie about
him on tv like maybe during a news
segment
is some kind of aesthetic awareness that
this is a very skinny wise man wrapped
in a robe like he has an image
of gandhi that's not really connected to
any kind of
political knowledge but he's pretty
detached but probably some preconception
that this is some kind of holy man as
even you know calling him mahatma
indicates rather than using his actual
first name hondas
you know but if i'm talking to someone
who's grown up in arkansas or grown up
in detroit or anything else and you say
to them oh yeah you know i know this is
your perspective on gandhi and indian
history you may have just gotten by
passively watching american television
or it's on this you've probably never
even watched a movie that was about
gandhi but you've seen some kind of
images this way um
you know uh
he wasn't an expert
in religion
he didn't really know anything about
hinduism buddhism or the philosophy of
ancient india he didn't study languages
like
sanskrit really
well he wore he wore a robe you know
he kind of dressed that way yeah yeah at
the very end of his life
um
do you know how his career actually
began and how he became a powerful
person uh politically no it was in
africa really africa okay now here's my
point if i'm talking to someone
born and raised in india whether they
are hindu buddhist
muslim
uh whether they are high caste or
outcast like
whether they're rich or poor across the
social spectrum
you are probably dealing with someone
who begins with a deeply
engrained bias they are really attached
to one view of
uh gandhi or another
and it's very difficult to have this
conversation now already okay no his
career should be in in africa africa not
india
oh in africa he was a lawyer
who became famous
arguing that brown skinned people people
of indian ancestry not black people not
africans
that people from india who were living
in africa
ought to have the right to fight in the
british army
alongside the white soldiers to fight
for england not against england
that that was how we got famous
oh
okay so curious
you want to do some research
want to challenge some freaking senate
ceo
you think you can tell me that where
this leads to this lab at hole rabbit
pardon me this rabbit hole if you go
down this rabbit hole if you start doing
this you think that's irrelevant to your
life
in kansas in arkansas in detroit in
washington in the united states america
i think if you do this research it's
going to become meaningful and it's
going to remain meaningful in your life
and it's going to come up again and
again and again it's going to be
connected to things you read things you
talk about and it does come up i when i
was involved in vegan activism came up
all the time and my critique of direct
action everywhere they may go back to
talking about uh gandhi but i criticized
what they were saying about gandhi and
they dropped it so it was a critique
that reached wayne siong the leader of
direct action never at that time since
then the leadership has changed so
they may go back to talking about ghani
but i've actually impacted other vegans
who was like look all you guys are
claiming
you know to be disciples of gandhi have
you read even one book about gandhi well
here are some facts you know so he came
up it comes up in all kinds of things it
enriches my understanding of volcanoes
history but at its most basic
fundamental simple level
you're already learning there the way
perceptions and assumptions
in 21st century politics
can be based on a kind of cartoon image
of someone it's a skinny man wrapped in
a robe so you have all these assumptions
but what kind of education he has you
know what his area of expertise is what
things he can be trusted on you have
assumptions about him being kind of
aloof from politics right
like as if he rises but well that's not
gandhi right now so right away now
you're you're you're thrust into a
situation where you realize that the
propaganda is radically incompatible
with reality who gandhi was what he knew
and what he didn't know start looking
into his sex life there's another shock
coming for you there guys he was not
living in celibacy when he was wearing
that robe let me tell you
okay
okay so but but
if you do this research now some people
can watch this they're 16 years old 18
years old 20 years old i'm telling you
you do this research this is easier for
you to visualize than if i talk about
something abstract like the border
between
uh china and india because we're talking
about a person but if you do the
research about the border between
china and india it also involves people
it's don't be surprised they're going to
be similar discoveries you know similar
uh uh you know shocking uh recognitions
and revelations that that come and go
right
but at this very simple level you learn
to question the difference between
appearances and reality assumptions
and the results of real research you
begin to cultivate a kind of detachment
that you can and will apply to your own
culture your own history your own
political milieu i think i do not need
to digress to add that you will never
gain any of these things from video
games you will never gain any of these
things from going to a nightclub you
will never gain any of these things from
sleeping with prostitutes now i think
there's also a real question what you do
gain from sleeping with prostitutes
actually i mean it's it's kind of there
are complex questions to be to be asked
there um it would be very strange to
claim you learn nothing from sleeping
with prostitutes you may learn a great
deal that you can't learn from books and
i have to concede that point but you
know what we're talking about this is a
book that used to be famous
and is now uh forgotten
about jfk
got jfk on the back over there
okay
now especially if i'm talking to someone
around 20 years old 18 19 20 21
okay you don't think
you have an emotional attachment
to jfk
but you do
all right to a much greater extent
then you have assumptions built up about
mohandas gandhi based on short little
clips on the news little you know images
in magazines and uh over-the-top claims
made by political leaders
indeed as mentioned even vegan political
leaders invoke the name of gandhi well
people do that with jfk
a lot okay are you are you willing to
hear
are you willing to hear the other side
of jfk
are you willing to hear some shocking
facts about who jfk was
politically and personally
you know that our work would show you
the reality of who this guy was is as
different from
your assumptions as you know the image
of gandhi as this pious celibate wise
religious leader is that different are
you willing are you really willing
now
it happens occasionally
but a couple weeks ago
i had someone writing in and asking
basically how he can develop
as an intellectual
and it may seem like strange advice but
i said well look and this guy had
written to me at some length and he
seemed stupid and crazy
i'm just being but but but to be clear
he seemed stupid and crazy but he also
seemed like something someone who was
highly motivated to really become an
intellectual seemed like someone who
really had passion and really wanted to
grow intellectually so that's good but
the stupid and crazy thing is a little
bit
a little bit dissuasive when you receive
those kinds of messages and so some of
you already know this but one of the
things i encouraged him to do i said
well look why don't you study the
political history of haiti so the french
revolution the haitian revolution and
then the aftermath were basically the
french
try to snuff out the haitian revolution
to simplify a little bit and i am not
saying this because
this is relevant to his life in the same
way that we've been talking about india
i was suggesting this and i said this
explicitly right i said i think you
should start by studying something
you're totally detached from where
you're you have no
emotional attachment whatsoever no
preconceptions what so we're really
learning starting from zero right but
with each and every one of these things
right you're really learning something
profoundly important about
human nature
and you you know you're also learning
about the industry propaganda and real
history you're learning all the ways
people lie and deceive you know the way
they deceive people at that time the way
that we deceive each other in
in the writing of history but like you
know uh in this camera but like
if you're only 20 years old you really
haven't developed yourself
intellectually right
you won't be able to get very much out
of this book
it's about how jfk was a terrible person
if you go when you study
the history of haiti
the history of the french revolution the
history of ancient greece the history of
ancient rome
the history of india kind of the
debunking of mohandas gandhi as a
political leader like you know
and then
and then you to
it's going to be really meaningful for
you and really rewarding for you right
because wherever you do research
what you're researching is human nature
it's like you're in a canoe
in the middle of a great lake
and no matter where you put your panel
down there's water
and no matter which way you decide is
forward
one way or another you have to choose
somewhere to put that paddle down and
start moving water
just going to take a moment to glance at
the the comments
okay so here's a great question from
from micah wright uh so i'm welcome to
the audience i don't remember you micah
i think i would remember you just
because your distinctive name
micah asks quote how do you feel about
studying scripture and building your
understanding of something like the
bible
okay so this is advice for young men now
i have a lot of experience dealing with
this including with my own current uh
girlfriend and amarata um
melissa here
you know
directly reading the bible in english
the vast majority of young people will
not know what they're looking at they
won't know how to analyze it they won't
see what's wrong with it so we went
through biblical passages melissa and i
should have brief period of being
interested in in educating herself this
way and always in the bible
and i would look at it and right away
i'd say oh yeah but don't you recognize
this is written by four different
authors
don't you see notice here there's a
break and then it repeats and then like
you notice these inconsistencies like
there are there's a kind of uh
historical and analytical focus i have
on the on the bible
of course it's the result of years of on
again off again looking at bible
scholarship like oh yeah but don't you
notice here this this contradicts this
and this is you know this is being
misrepresented i'm picking up on all
this stuff
um the vast majority of people
especially at say age 20 they can't do
that
with the bible and
you know of course the use of language
and the way it's translated is part of
it but in in large part it's also just
the nature of the text itself
that it doesn't lend itself easily to
that kind of analysis now again i think
i can say with
ancient greece and rome
probably or ancient buddhism if you've
built yourself up through the study of
ancient texts and some other field you
then might be able to come at the bible
so look the but the easy middle path to
recommend
is reading one of the truly atheistic
hard-hitting analysts and scholars
of the bible like richard carrier
so
uh you can listen to some of his uh so
richard carrier versus the historical
jesus
um i am not going to
endorse any particular book of his
but if you look up richard carrier you
will see um
he's devoted his life to this and he's
someone i mean it's one of those things
a lot of people they can't see the
problems with the text but once you
explain to them like once it's been seen
it can't be unseen once you start to
learn to really be more demanding in
reading the text and why is it written
this way you know why is it where you
know
to look at it that way then it becomes
comprehensible to you so i just
mentioned an example that was that was
given by a christian preacher
was actually the use of the word so
sow
in the bible and he was giving a lecture
to college students think universe so
these would be people 18 19 20 years old
sauna and he stopped them he challenged
them he read a very simple passage of
the bible he said what does the word so
mean here
and none of them knew and none of them
had questioned it so this is incredibly
like elementary like you don't know what
so sow means you know this is not we
have a different noun in english we have
sow so
but like you know where where just your
level of literacy is too limited to
really
take that on you know so the bible is i
mean in some ways it's an unusually
frustrating text
for young people to read
now
you know
look
i'm giving advice for people i presume
are stupider than myself we had a we had
a comment here
earlier which i assume was just meant as
an insult saying that um quote i think
you perceive yourself as a genius
well look if i were making this video
only addressing
young men or a younger version of myself
it would be totally different okay
because i mean when i was a child
i was able to read the bible
and notice
contradictions and problems in it that
astonished my father
and i was right i mean like well like
years later i read scholarship that
backed up like what i discovered was
correct and i was just reading it and
interrogating it in a genuinely
skeptical and demanding way and i think
on a very basic level looking at it as
the work of human hands like look if
this is written it's written
intentionally and you know just
comparing the four gospels like well
this gospel says this and then you look
at this other gospel and it has been
intentionally changed to instead say
that
and my own father was very freaked out
by that
um but i was i was a child i'd have to
remember i don't know if i was 11 years
years old or what so i'm not saying this
to insult you
but i'm not giving advice to people like
myself
now we can get into the disadvantages i
had as a young man too i didn't only
have advantages but i have had to learn
i mean i would love to think people have
this stuff in common with me that they
can read the bible at age 11 the way i
did but i've learned it's not true i
mean i've really seen it and i've seen
that partly from helping others and
talking to others you know
now you know obviously i have this whole
bizarre much more difficult to relate to
experience with buddhist scholarship
than the way people just did not see
what the text was directly saying to you
because they didn't want to see it
as most people were middle-aged adults
or elderly adults that was not talking
to young people because there were no
young people reading ancient buddhist
texts so that's another kind of another
kind of problem but you know uh
i just say i'm being self-critical here
this is not a humble brag but no i'm
actually not giving advice to young men
who would be my equals
in this in this respect and look you
know i mean
and there are so many advantages and
disadvantages that get
that get rolled up into this
um
you know including just the quality of
your eyesight you know i mean how well
you can read you know
you know it comes down to some kind of
absurd
absurdly simple uh things like this that
differentiate one one person from
another but you know when i was with one
of my ex-girlfriends from the past
i felt one of her disadvantages was just
that she had incredibly low standards
you know she didn't look at the bible
and expect it to be brilliant and expect
expected to be well written you know she
didn't look at karl marx that way either
when i read marx i i wonder if my mother
still has the copy i read but when i
read marx for the first time i was going
through and circling everything wrong
with it and i still stand by that
decades later
i was finding things wrong with marx and
i was right there there were real
problems in marx's desk avatar um
but you know the point is when they're
two very different books uh marxist
desktops down in the bible but the point
is i'm looking at this and this is
supposed to be genius you know you know
again sorry i can appeal to melissa she
knows when i watch star wars i watch it
that was like anything when i watch
batman like i'm watching with these
really high expectations and i'm looking
at every word as being very
intentionally placed in the text which
you know it is
that's the way to read the bible that's
the way to read karl marx that's the way
to watch star wars yeah
oh yeah yeah
but yeah even even this video now
my choice of words is very deliberate
and intentional i mean even though this
is completely unedited i have no ability
to change anything i've said still you
know yeah i know i mean really
understanding art and artifice and the
relationship of the author to the page
and the page to the reader and really
that these things are so simple they
rarely get get talked about but sure and
then and then interrogating those texts
with really high standards
um
that
there are many advantages i had over
other young men or young people but
yeah i mean this is one that kind of
cascades through many other aspects of
the learning experience
that when you talked about watching star
wars for example yes many people like to
get swept up into a story and that's
what they enjoy about reading that's
what they enjoy about watching
movies right
that is something that i see
it's a different process going on yes
when you were
analyzing something
yeah
well i think the disturbing thing is to
reflect on what does it really mean to
be swept up
so you know um
so you're talking about the bible as an
example here
the bible is an emotionally moving text
you can get swept up in reading the
gospel you can read you can read all
four gospels in one day it's not very
long
but you can read at least you can read
one gospel all day it really doesn't do
everyone
okay
what does it mean
to be swept up
in reading the gospel so like you know i
can say this the first time i read the
gospels i was emotionally had an
emotional impact on me it did however
i noted i mean the first time i read it
i noticed
the uh
passage about the olive tree
where jesus says if a tree doesn't bear
fruit out of season you should just pray
to god to destroy it and god will blight
it and
smite it from the face of the earth it's
totally absurd it's totally ridiculous
remember that and i can ask you do you
remember that where jesus walks past a
tree and he curses it for not bearing
fruit out of season
right and you can look at that right
away and you can say the text does not
make sense
now the reason it doesn't make sense is
it's because it's an allegory that is
not translated the real meaning is not
literal the whole the whole gospel is
not something that literally happened
none of it's intended to be recording of
historical events but the problem is
what the is wrong with you
if you read that text and you didn't
notice that like that's the problem is
you you should be every single one of
these things you should be catching on
you should realize you know you should
be really holding this
every word has been placed there
intentionally you can't look at that as
if oh it's just happenstance it just so
happened that on his way to the temple
one day jesus passed a tree and he
wished he could take some fruit from it
but it was out of season so he cursed
the tree and then they go to the temple
and then we left the temple
the tree was blighted because god had
destroyed it like god had destroyed this
because he prayed for it and jesus says
yeah you should do that that's a really
any time any time a tree pisses you off
from being fruit not bearing fruit at us
you should just have god blow it up for
you or destroy it like
well you know the reason why it doesn't
make any sense is because it's just some
that happen no so you know but this is
my point you know no i could give
examples from karl marx
but another one that's that's was
obvious to me on first reading was uh
the misattribution of the the ten
commandments and the story of moses and
millions of people read the story of
moses every year and they don't realize
that the king james translation the the
captions and the headings they are lying
about the ten commandments but what are
the ten commandments in that story maybe
somewhat longer things up but i read it
the first time i was like i noticed that
immediately on first oh yeah but that's
not the thing commandments that's
several pages later
why why is everyone quoting this is the
thing comments clearly it's explicit in
the text a different passage is telling
you the ten commandments this is uh
right
anyway
i don't believe that i don't believe
that okay
you know soon but my point is here i'm
actually not giving advice to people
like me i'm not giving advice for people
who can be to that extent and auto diet
act teach themselves totally and
probably those people i mean well okay i
would have benefited from the advice but
i'm just saying i'm actually giving
advice for people with the assumption
that they don't have the advantages you
know i had
and look there's danger involved okay
there is dude we got a great company
vegan gains is streaming video games
right now we're missing okay guys all
right we have 33 people in the audience
if you want to leave and go watch
richard play video games right now vegan
games
so if this conversation is less useful
go watch vegan gains please play a
simulation of shooting people in the
head you know again again
um
anyway i'm sorry i've i've lost i've
lost the train of thought i had uh
before that uh delightful distraction
oh right this is what i was gonna say
there is a risk okay
uh
let's say you're talking about a 16 year
old and i mean 16 year olds are rational
right
but they're easily swayed they're easily
overwhelmed they're easily brainwashed
if you hand a 16 year old a copy of the
quran
what's going to happen
what if you hand 10 000 16 year olds
copy the ground and i remember even
within judaism you know when i was
growing up you saw this happening in
toronto you know
some percentage of teenagers who were
part of secular modern jewish families
would commit to like hyper orthodox
super fundamentalist judaism because
they were being handed these sacred
texts
like they listen to their parents to
some extent but at some point they
decide hey this book knows better than
you mom and dad and they become
fundamentalists they become extremists
people can read the quran and it ruins
their lives tons of examples people can
read the gospel and everyone thought
even if it's just for five years or ten
years right you get swept up in it what
does it mean to be swept up in it right
um
and karl marx is the ultimate example i
mean it's unbelievable to me how many
people let the reading of karl marx ruin
their lives and i mean dash capital at
its core is a completely dry and boring
thesis about economics
um which is it's 101 it's high school
level economics but still that destroys
people's lives so again i'm i'm not
really able to give advice to you here
like if you're a young man watching this
with which the assumption that you're
the same kind of young man i was because
i read all this stuff with these very
high standards the very strong sense of
my own will and motivation with a very
strong sense that
i was the equal to karl marx
that i was the equal to the men who had
written the bible
you know karl marx is an author i am an
author this is a book you know that's it
there's nothing else you know what i
mean there's no magic there and you know
it says the buddhist monks who wrote
ancient buddhist scriptures they were
men
um
i believe a few women
it's a good question were any women
actually involved in writing the pali
canon
maybe uh probably it was all written
down by men but anyway there were a few
female voices recorded in the pelican
there are a few speak spoken parts or
women there's a predominantly male uh
profession
um
you know but just really seeing it in
that radically egalitarian way
um the equality of authors
you know as opposed to you know
regarding this as a hallowed and
unquestionable uh authority you know and
by the way you know if you read karl
marx a lot of it very directly and emote
in an emotionally transparent way
reflects what was going on in his life
so if you guys haven't read marks you
don't know this that's probably the best
part of his writing is that you get a
sense of what's going on in his life as
a struggling intellectual and author and
you know he's he's messing around trying
to be a labor union organizer but he
can't really do it and stuff you know i
mean you get a sense of when you know
with this period he's living in france
and then he's living in uh england and
so on i'm sorry i forget if he actually
lived differently he spoke french
fluently but he moved from germany to
england yeah
you just get that very human human
sense but anyway likewise you know uh
you know talk about mohandas gandhi or
something
he was a guy he became a lawyer he went
into politics
looking at that fundamentally human and
egalitarian way is a is a big shift in
perspective but
i have to give advice for people
and i know there's danger here and a lot
of people can't do what i did and a lot
of people if they took the same risks
that i did
their lives would be
we have some people here who support the
assassination of jfk i'm not entirely
surprised
well i hope i live long enough to see
how the perception of jfk changes just
i'm just responding to some
miscellaneous comments here about it
uh but you know obviously there was this
one film made by oliver stone
that um
you know
changed the way the whole world you know
saw this and you know uh anyway
but i hope i live long enough to see
oliver stone's influence evaporate
because that film was its own kind of
mythology
so anyway mateo uh thanks me and donates
ten dollars thanks mateo
this will be the the most profitable day
for my channel in the whole month
my channel generates a few dollars a day
but hey it's
it's better than playing video games
it's better than going skiing it's
better than a whole lot of other things
uh i don't know how much you get into
this sat12 asks quote what if you
designed a philosophy video game
um
okay sorry i i kind of feel it would be
a whole different video to get into the
educational potential of video games
what i'll say is this
um
it's interesting to talk about
hypothetically
how educational video games could be
but it's really more important to talk
about
the total lack of educational value in
the reality of what video games actually
are
you know
now
beyond that um
[Music]
you know i know most people are very
uncomfortable talking about this stuff
but
the sexuality that's displayed in video
games
um just the depiction of women in skin
type
you know attire
in a game like the street fighter series
of games
this is a powerful erotic effect on
young men
and you know we can go back to my
generation talk about
street fighter ii
we can talk about um
uh bare-knuckle
also known as streets of rage like you
know we're really the number of pixels
is so few like this is an erotic drawing
that's made up of just a few points of
light on a screen and you can look at
games like street fighter v now my point
is not that these are the most sexually
salacious games
they're not these are precisely the
games that parents think are are
harmless
well you know this is erotic imagery
that young men are looking at again and
again and again you're seeing over many
hours and you're seeing the same
animations repeated thousands of of
times
um
and you know i do have this very
accurate memory going back into my
childhood i can remember very fleeting
erotic images that i saw
you know as a boy that really had a big
had a big impact on me
so you know
um
[Music]
do you want to talk about some of the
hypothetical or do you want to talk
about science actual
you know
is it possible to design a video game
that would help you learn a foreign
language yes
nobody's ever done it and nobody's doing
it and it may sound like a preposterous
claim but for for decades i've tried to
find video games that would help me
practice language and you know aside
from the crudest type of memorization
card game i've bought some i think i
have one still on the hard drive of this
computer they have paid money for this
kind of search and i searched for many
different languages to see who was doing
software and i've spoken to software
developers and i've spoken to people in
universities
and so like to say like there's a real
total failure
to produce
educational videos oh we own
we own the only language education games
for the nintendo
3ds 2ds ds library incredibly few and i
went through all of them you know
there's there's like french tutor and
chinese tutor
so
you know okay there's a kind of footnote
here if you want to talk about the
educational potential of video games but
let's not let that footnote distract
from the
the reality of what video games are in
our lives
um it just isn't the justification for
for somebody else
so we had some more questions asking to
talk further about karl marx guys we did
do videos on that in the past or i did
sorry i say we because melissa was kind
of involved spiritually
you might say uh with those videos but i
remember i made a video talking about
marks and
um
i got a playlist so that's uh that
solves that problem okay there you go
you guys can sort it out yeah the one
about uh
napoleon iii that's a really good one
uh
yeah you guys gonna have to go through
and figure it out
uh
the french revolution not hegel created
marxism yeah i think all that's pretty
slow you've got a couple hours there
anyway more than one hour of me talking
about karl marx
so as always i have to um
i have to invoke youtubers privilege
here and and show you that i've already
made videos covering some of these
topics
so i have a lot of comments coming here
i'm just trying to catch up before i uh
return to the uh thread of what i'm
saying
and i appreciate your comments guys but
obviously i can't respond to all of it
not all of it is directly science
uh
okay so here's a question from javier
javier asks quote do you think there is
any value to understanding the chemistry
of the brain while playing video games
or any dopamine-related activities
so as to be aware of what is happening
so have you
i'm gonna try to relate this to the
overarching
topic of the video but i think it's a
genuinely interesting subject in itself
um so i have a couple different books
here
oh you guys remember i did a review of
this
uh who did and who didn't kill martin
luther king jr okay here's a book about
jfk
and here's a book about
uh the milai massacre okay milan
massacre a famous event in the history
of vietnam okay so uh let's say
i have you
and your twin brother
sit down
and read these two books
with some kind of advanced mri brain
scanning activity i direct it at your
head wait wait it doesn't matter if it's
mri there are many different ways to
scan brain activity okay
what's the conclusion we're going to
come to
about which book you should read
and how how would we possibly come to
that conclusion on the basis of the
analysis of how much dopamine activity
is in your brain or how much his
activity is in various lobes of your
brain all right so
the two levels of analysis
are incompatible
right now obviously i'm not saying that
they're
scanning activity in the brain is a
completely irrelevant or completely
useless form of research but you know
there are still a few publications on
paper i don't i don't see them for sale
anywhere anymore but there are some
publications that are just book reviews
you know where the whole magazine is
just reviews of new books coming up
again i haven't seen them for sale for
decades but the i've looked into it some
of those still exist
um
what if you and i start a new
magazine have you
where we just review books based on the
dopamine levels and brain scans of the
person well they're written
you could publish that you say okay oh
here's this new book on the milai
massacre and here are the chart readings
you know chapter oh so chapter six you
know his dopamine levels
we're not going to be able to come to
any conclusion about how rewarding this
is or how well written it is or
something like
we can't draw the conclusions we want to
draw about this topic through brain
scans now again i'm just going to
briefly expand on this to apply it to
the top of this video talking about
giving
advice to young men about how to be an
intellectual how to be a better person
how to lead a meaningful life how to set
yourself up to be in a in a position to
be a better person when you get to be 30
40 50. uh 60 70.
because i believe i'm not just
interested in how good you look on
instagram
next month or six months from now let's
really think about you know 100-year you
know uh uh time frame here you know
let's really think about how you're
gonna live your life how are you gonna
live and die you know the long-term
value of what you're doing with your
brain what you're what you're doing with
your life
you know
um
if we look at all the different
activities in terms of
dopamine levels in your brain in terms
of what makes you happy or what makes
you mentally active i'm sure you could
come to a conclusion based on brain
scale
based on brain scan evidence
young men need to be engaged in downhill
skiing uh uh you know uh parachuting you
know skydiving uh uh on uh
coral
deep sea spear fishing
uh i remember i i didn't meet this guy i
met a guy who met a guy who had gone
shark wrestling i'd never heard of that
before so it's where you you dive you're
wearing dive equipment and you actually
wrestle a shark
in the yeah so this is something people
pay money to do i i can imagine that
would be very exciting i think i think
it's not vegan um
i've never heard about vegans protesting
against shark wrestling um
you know okay you know but but like the
the judgments we're going to make can
never be on that level now so javier so
now i've spoke with this more broadly
and talked about over a 10-year period
or 20-year period what conclusions come
to now let's let's talk about it very
very narrowly
um
you know
what is the significance in your life
if for 10 years the main form of
entertainment let's say for 10 years
three hours a day
you watch someone getting shot in the
head again and again and again so i'm
talking about first person shooter games
but there are people who play those
games like call of duty you know this
this type of game which is really
simulating you holding a gun and
shooting someone in the head again and
again and again and you know within one
hour like you tell me how many shootings
take place in these games you know and
that is the main form of entertainment
that is your literature that is the
poetry of your life that is the
shakespeare of your life is sitting and
playing a game like call of duty or
rainbow six you know for ten years
it doesn't matter
what brain chart you show me about
dopamine activity in the brain like i'm
completely conceding the point you could
have a test subject who lives that way
for 10 years they play video games this
way and you can do the brain scans i
know once a month
you take brain scans and you show look
this doesn't do any brain damage doesn't
do any harm he has totally healthy
brain function dopamine levels are good
i i completely conceived that you know i
think that's
i have no claim that video games cause
brain damage right in plain english the
claim is the video games make you into
an
like that's the claim you know
and and no matter how good a person you
are after living your life that way for
10 years and
you show me an example i mean i think
most those guys are they're
terrible people but if you show me an
example someone who's a wonderful person
despite playing video games this way for
10 years three hours a day every day for
10 years let's say which is not common
sadly you know um
think about how much better a person
they could have been if instead for
three hours a day they were reading
books like this one non-fiction books
challenging themselves learning and then
let's say they were even coming on the
internet like this and talking to
wonderful people like you about these
books and what they've been learning
let's just add a social dimension to it
or something you know we're never going
to
you know we're never going to come to
any of those conclusions through brain
scans you know so i i really very
fundamentally think that the brain scan
approach to video games is going down
the wrong path it's the wrong kind of
analysis it's the wrong kind of critique
now babe do you want to hand me your
book on uh antidepressants i'll just
hold it up for something there you go
okay um right here on this we have a lot
of desks this relationship is rich in
desks not so rich in beds
we have three beds
i don't know how many deaths we have and
we have a lot of death space
um
[Music]
okay i'm gonna challenge myself i'm
gonna challenge you by just saying you
know the critique of antidepressants the
critique of prescription mind-altering
drugs to what extent are we even going
down the wrong path and trying to
criticize those in terms of brain
chemistry and brain damage because you
see everyone ignores it everyone
justifies it right so like even if you
have brain scans that show that video
games cause some kind of damage
something like compared to cocaine it's
never going to be that significant well
we have brain scans showing that the
harm cocaine does nobody quit cocaine
nobody says oh well having examined the
evidence having examined the mri
evidence of how much damage they're
going to quit okay but even these these
drugs are much less entertaining than
cocaine i mean you know ritalin okay
maybe not ritalin people tell me
ritalin's pretty close to cocaine but
anyway you know cyprexa well you will
butcher and clone a pen you know
whatever any of these uh or the whole
body of ssri drugs like prozac people
okay i have never heard of a prostitute
you know
performing sex acts in order to have
money so she can buy
prozac you know it's it's not gratifying
in the same way cocaine is but you know
my point is if we can't get people to
quit
cocaine
or prozac on the basis of that kind of
hard evidence what is the point gonna be
of engaging with with video games that
way
um
and look you know with that kind of
question and that kind of answer i hope
i'm wrong
wouldn't it be wouldn't it be so great
if i were wrong
wouldn't it be so wonderful if
people just look at the charts look at
the facts
and say oh that's it gee we should all
quit taking ssris we should hope you
know
and and by the way uh sorry so let's
bring this back to another major theme
in this video
do you think you could convince someone
to be an atheist do you think you could
convince someone to quit prayer
through
brain scans through showing a scan of
the brain this is what happens in your
brain while you're engaged in prayer i
don't
i don't think you could i don't think
anyone's going to jump on that i don't
think that's going to change the world
and you know there have been so many
brain scans done about related to
buddhist meditation you know and
of course people interpret this in this
ridiculous way to to try to justify and
vindicate um buddhist meditation as a as
a panacea you know so on and so forth
um
this is a rare case where people are
really talking amongst themselves in the
audience it's fine it just gives me a
lot to read through when i try to catch
up with you
one person comments dopamine book
reviews is a nice sales pitch
okay babe do you want to jump into
anything i'm going to take questions in
the audience but you know
[Laughter]
um so look i i did intend this to be a
short video and i'm happy to to wrap it
up with this at this point
um
all right
you know
a big part of the role you have to play
as an older and more experienced person
is to tell younger inexperienced people
about what it is they can't imagine and
you know in some cases you're telling
them look
like if you join the army it's going to
be worse than you can possibly imagine
in this this and this way like you can't
imagine how bad it's going to be because
your only experience is going to high
school well it's here are the ways in
which it's worse than high school you
haven't thought about this you know
since that but sometimes you're telling
young people
younger people or more inexperienced
people these things are going to be
better
in a way you can't possibly imagine now
i have been saying through this whole
video and it's the topic of the video
that this is addressed this is advice
addressed to young men you know what the
tragedy is
i give the same advice to people who are
50 years old
you know you can be 50 years old and
still at that first step of intellectual
development and the odds are the reason
why you got to age 50 and never went
through that other intellectual
development is because you have been
playing video games you have been
smoking marijuana
you have been drinking beer you have
been watching sports on television
whether that be basketball or football
or baseball you know you've been alive
for 50 years you've been doing something
but you haven't been learning you
haven't been challenging yourself you
haven't been you haven't been growing in
this way um so the advice i'd give to a
young man of 20 is in many ways
shockingly similar to a man of 50
but
it's harder for him to accept it's
harder for him to reckon with it's
harder for him to take seriously it's
harder for him to look at
what he's done with his life and there's
a kind of sunk cost fallacy there well
you put all this time into football can
you admit to yourself that football was
what's going on you put all this time
into playing video games can you admit
to yourself this was a waste of time
there's something excuse me and again my
my friend have been referring to the 25
year old in germany
whether or not it's jealousy there are
some people who are going to look at him
and meet him and talk to him and feel
like oh
this is the person i could be this is
what i could be doing with my life this
is the kind of result of research and
the life of the mind that i could have
and instead whether whether they've been
going to night clubs or sleeping with
prostitutes or playing video games
whatever they've been doing it's not the
life of the mind there are many
alternatives lifeline maybe they're
doing downhill skiing i mean you know
could be anything you know but they
haven't been cultivating themselves and
pressing forward in this in this kind of
uh meaningful studious way so this same
encounter and this same kind of uh
uh confrontation between the examined
life and the unexamined life um
it can happen at any age at any stage of
life
and
you know it's of course with great
sadness if you have this reckoning at
age 50 that you realize how many years
you've got left how much of your own
intellectual potential you have
squandered
and then you face the challenge of what
can you do now how far can you go what
what progress can you make and you know
do you have the humility
because let me tell you something i mean
i was already an old man when i started
learning chinese
i started on page one chapter one with
chinese worship
like you know doing the abcs of chinese
as an as an old man do you have the
humility to start all over again i'm
someone it's
it's both a strength and a weakness but
obviously in many ways i can appreciate
the strength i've been forced to start
again on page one chapter one of several
totally different fields of study
totally different areas of expertise and
totally different languages again and
again again and a lot of guys at age 50
they would rather just keep on playing
video games or keep on watching sports
or remain within the one field in which
they feel some sense of self-confidence
and power you know whatever that is like
they're a veteran they're a vet they
know how to cut the balls off a dog they
feel like an expert when they're a vet
they don't feel like taking off the
jacket and recognizing that they're
probably balefully ignorant of
everything else you know politics
history uh languages what have you you
know that actually they're an
embarrassingly ignorant unsophisticated
person under every other possible
heading except
how to chop the balls off of somebody's
pet cocker spaniel you know
so um
[Music]
you know what that haven't been said if
you're talking to a 50 year old vet
they do still have some part of their
life
they can feel confident about they have
some area where they are accomplished
so that may make them
more willing to face up to embrace
encounter challenge the unknown to take
on you know whether it's the history of
india the history of vietnam the history
of china or you know the history within
the united states of america that may be
very
disturbing to them re-examining who jfk
really was what are some it may be that
the sense of strength and power they
have in one area of expertise and maybe
they've done some research you know
within being a vet or something you know
that that will enable them to do it and
when you're talking to someone who's
only 20 years old again really it's like
18 all the way up like 23 frankly when
you're talking to younger people who
don't have this kind of experience if
they haven't been
extremely exceptional self-confident
auto-didactic
intellectuals with most young people
um you're talking to someone who has no
sense of power no sense of strength no
sense of expertise anywhere
and that's why you know they break down
crying a lot i mean there's a lot of
real suffering and sorrow um in these
intellectual encounters you know there
are people who obviously feel like they
already know uh
karl marx and they're
let's say a 20 year old who already
feels very confident that they're a
marxist that they're a socialist you
know etc and then you reveal to them
that they don't know anything about marx
a great example is what i said before
about gandhi they're people who feel
very strongly they know who gandhi was
they know what his philosophy was and
for example they might be a young person
who's interested in yoga
and they eat a vegan diet and they're an
activist and they're interested in
animal rights and and global warming
this is their combined set of interests
and then you tell them some things that
completely challenge completely ruin the
image of mohandas gandhi that had their
minds and and there's a kind of collapse
you know someone the 50 year old vet i
keep saying vet i don't mean veteran i
mean a veterinary scientist a veterinary
doctor but you know the 50 year old vet
he may at least have a source of
confidence that he can retreat to he may
feel more
more able
to
challenge and change and discard you
know old assumptions and when you are
talking to younger people
very often you will see them completely
emotionally collapse even when it's
something that isn't it isn't their
religion like they aren't hindu they
don't worship mohammed's gandhi they
don't regard him as their own religious
leader but they're
it's so it's such
an unexpected challenge for them to
recognize that everything they know was
wrong even in an area like that which
their ego wasn't directly connected to
uh that they break down crying that they
crumble that it's a it's a life-changing
shattering thing to recognize their own
ignorance and realize how much work they
have to do whether you're talking about
marxism you're talking about the bible
you're talking mohanuskani and i've i've
certainly seen that i've i've seen that
um
i could tell various specific stories
but even people who were at the end of
their phds people who had a phd or they
were in the last year of their phd
studies where i say something that
really totally challenges their
assumptions and worldview and i'm not
just being provocative i really do know
what i'm talking about
and they have to realize the extent to
which they are in fact a beginner
in the very field they thought
themselves to be experts you wanna say
something
good
it's a great time we were in thailand
together
that's a good example go on yeah
[Music]
yeah yeah
there was an older gentleman who was
talking about buddhism
he had no idea that an expert of
buddhism some of you might know this guy
he was a very big
muscular
uh white guy
i would not say he was a bodybuilder i
don't know what sport he did but he had
a lot of muscle on him he was a very
physically imposing guy
um
he couldn't do gardening for all i know
he could build up your arms like he
didn't look like a bodybuilder he was a
big imposing white guy living in chiang
mai he's a vegan activist and he's
married to a thai woman yeah yeah do you
want to say more one
yeah
it's
just interesting for me to reflect on
that that's one where you saw it that's
right yeah
yeah he didn't break down the crime
no
and and he was about 50 he was more than
50 years old
he was at that point where i think that
he could handle himself when somebody
confronted him in a situation like this
whereas right probably younger men
okay
i feel that he uh
i feel he uh so here's an off topic
william mcgeeham says gandhi had a great
name
that's why people revered him and he
showed some emojis joking you're wrong
william you're wrong in india the name
gandhi means green grocer means grocery
store manager it's a common name yeah
it's not
in case you know george washington
washing ton think about what that name
becomes familiar and you forget oh he
his ancestors would wash clothes for a
living
but no gandhi he did not get a heck cuz
he had a catchy name unlike me i get it
i get ahead of the basis of mine if you
if you google isil mazard i'm the only
guy with search results my name were
john smith i'd be at a great
disadvantage
um
yeah
you know i feel so this encounter that
happened in thailand this was this guy
and we'll set the stage a little bit it
was something like a monthly meeting of
vegan activists and these were white
english-speaking vegan activists there
were
thai active there were different
different types of vegan activists but
these were white western uh people
living in thailand who are involved in
this kind of activism so melissa and i
show up and one of the strange things
about the guy was he didn't know who i
was other people did it was revealed
they didn't make a big deal of it but
the the younger people there they all
knew who i was um i'm famous within that
sphere but this this white guy he was
completely accustomed to
being the big imposing important
presence and de facto leader of these
meetings
i have no objection to that but he was
very very accustomed
to um
uh repeating the same kind of
catchphrases
um the same kind of uh
thought terminating cliches about
buddhism and how buddhism you know
supported veganism and then he was
sitting there you know with someone like
me in the room and then what i recall is
i came close to our modern ideal of uh
socratic method
which is not the actually historically
true historic uh cigarette but it's not
what the real socrates was historically
but the way we think of scrimmage or you
know i was just i would just said a few
words i mean if you were really paying
attention to my posture and tone of
voice you could tell i knew a lot more
than i was
right but but how do you know that yeah
but have you have you actually read the
ancient text you're according to you
know where that comes from like really
kind of short questions like this
and i feel that he basically responded
by kind of shutting down
um like you know so shutting down means
differently but but he he didn't make
eye contact he kind of looked away and
was kind of looking down
and he was like well yeah that's a good
point and kind of pressing like he was
kind of repeatedly and i was i was
looking forward and i'm completely
no no let's you know i understand why
you say that but you know buddhism is
based on written ancient texts so do you
know what it is you're have you actually
read that do you know what you're going
you know like
anyway buddhism is a very strange
religion that way because the vast
majority of buddhists have never read
the equivalent to the bible they don't
know the text you know and uh oh yeah
right but if and you know you make
another grandiose claim about buddhism
here but if that were true then this
would also be true right have you
noticed this
do you know do you know what language
those texts were written you know
and i mean eventually i mean he really
was not willing to have the conversation
he was like yeah i was a scholar of pali
do you know what pally is that's the
language
yeah i've written i've written an
article about that do you remember
and uh you know maybe i'm wrong i often
perceive other people as being larger
than there i remember him being bigger
than me just physically um but if i'm
wrong it's just because i'm i'm often
generous in actually estimating other
people's size we were all sitting down
not standing up but he he seemed to take
up more space at the at the table than
myself uh it could also just be that i
was sitting in a more humble kind of
posture because indeed i wasn't i wasn't
a i wasn't the host or something i
wasn't i wasn't in charge of the meeting
but it seemed as if i was the smaller
presence
uh physically but yeah um
you know what i said it was not just
challenging his authority it was really
undermining his assumptions about what
he knew and what he thought he knew yeah
and how you would know it and it was
really demonstrating to him look you
you're talking about this as if you're
you're preaching sort of familiar set of
tenets and conclusions about veganism
and buddhism buddhism and animal rights
and he obviously had given exactly the
same lecture again and again and again
to both thai people and white people he
was saying that he said well this is
what i tell other activists he was he
was indicating this is something he said
again again and i was indicating to him
no you are still at step one
you are actually you're a false beginner
but you were actually just so yeah that
was that kind of situation right as i
recall it was a kind of pet talk about
how to spread veganism
he he was talking about
what he tells the activists he worked
with
and to his credit he you know he had
married a thai woman and he spoke some
thai so it included anecdotes about how
he tries to motivate
those people
anyway this is um
this is uh
yeah you might think that he would have
nothing to gain from studying some other
unrelated good point
no but that's exactly what he lacks
right okay like look you know um
in german we have these weird terms like
uh fremdog's effect you know in english
if you say estrangement it has a
negative connotation if you say
detachment nobody knows what you mean
including the buddhist concept of
detachment but you know
that guy i mean what surprised me was
that neither during the meeting nor
after he was not capable of learning
from me like he was not even capable of
making an economy and talking to me
saying oh that's interest i'd like to
hear more or i'd like to read your
article because i told him i've written
an article on exactly that topic the
history of vegetarianism within buddhism
the fact that the buddha was not
vegetarian the buddha did eat meat etc
you know i'm sorry his whole world view
was totally false he knew nothing about
this but he was not able to learn from
me he wasn't even able to like express
curiosity no that's right he was
incapable of curiosity he was incapable
of open-mindedness you know so on and so
forth you know now
whether you talk about that in terms of
detachment or not i do think you know
the type of curiosity the type of
detachment you can build that up exactly
by doing research on things you are
estranged from you know like if you
researched the history of the
china-india border conflict if you had
been through that process of debunking
mahatma gandhi you had been through the
process of debunking
jfk like there can be a constellation of
various mutually isolated unrelated
research processes where you get
familiar with what it's like to be wrong
yourself like oh wow i feed it this way
now i realized i'm totally wrong i
realize now how this assumption you know
led to this set of assumptions and even
though the first assumption was was half
true you know what that led to was a you
know totally false
like you you've gotten used to
criticizing yourself you know kind of
overcoming your own misconceptions and
you've gotten used to
overcoming others like you know
melissa's been doing a research project
on the history of central asia but even
if you look at the research you did
about the history of greece or something
like
you may not realize how biased and wrong
the first book you read on that topic
was until you've read the third of the
fourth book you know oh now i realize
the first book i read it was totally
misleading me i mean socrates is a great
example most people are burdened with
this totally false notion of who
socrates was and why he matters uh
historically i could say the same about
aristotle frankly you know mostly
there's a kind of mythology and people
don't even realize that what they know
is a myth and they may have heard it
from high school teachers they may have
heard at university and then at what
point does that crack
and you realize oh wow like the first
book i read about this or might have
just been a chapter of a book it might
be one paragraph in a book might have
been one paragraph in your high school
history book now i realized that that
misled me and by the way for me
personally something like the french
revolution it's like that again and
again like the first several books and
articles i read about the french
revolution i can now realize the way in
which they were wrong in themselves and
the way in which they misled me because
it's partly me like i read that article
and i take it in this direction you know
but yeah no no no no i mean this issue
of
doing research with all kinds of
unrelated things
where you have detachment
yeah and the way that then enables you
when when maybe something you really
care about you know and so it's really
attached to your own identity you think
you have a kind of uh
uh expertise
about veganism and about
uh
yeah the connection between
vegetarianism and buddhism and vegan
activism and you know the buddhist
philosophers you feel
very confident about this and then
someone steps up and says hey you
actually don't know what you're talking
about you're you're completely wrong you
know the way to prepare for that the way
to have some some basis you know
it's not even necessarily doing research
on buddhism but it's having that kind of
research background where you've really
built up
in this very particular sense some depth
of character
yeah
um
and no i think that's fair to say about
that guy he was a guy who was very used
to being in charge and very used to
going unquestioned
probably just because of his size
and you know let's be real too i mean it
depends what kind of movement you're
leading with veganism also
most people just don't question the
people in charge they have good you're
trying to save animals
it's not the same as questioning does
this guy really know how to operate a
crane on a construction site you know
like does this guy really know how to
build a brick wall you really know what
you're doing you know but you know when
you're just trying to motivate people to
help save the animals or something most
people are not going to really do you
know what do you really know what you're
talking about
right but as you know i have about a
hundred or 500 videos doing what exactly
what the heart is and very often the
advice vegans give whether it's about
nutrition or anything else nutrition or
buddhism or anything else it is it is uh
uh profoundly wrong
yeah um
you know associates we're talking a lot
about detachment here we're talking
about estrangement
um
you know it's so
sad i mean i really can just use the
simple word sad it's so sad to me that
people will make the right decision for
someone else but make the wrong decision
for themself
again and again and again people are
inclined to be
self-indulgent
but they're not indulgent of others
they're demanding of others and have
high standards for others so
you know um
hey james i could pick anyone in the
audience uh hey mateo
i got
i got news mateo
um
you know when your mother was pregnant
with you before you were born
there was an extra set of cells
kept at the hospital
there was an embryo identical to your
own at the hospital as part of this
fertility treatment clinic
and they took that embryo and they
implanted it in another woman
so there's an identical twin to you
there's a genetic duplicate of you but
it was just born yesterday you got to
come pick up the baby
you have to raise your own clone you
have to raise your own
twin
you have to be a parent
to someone who is genetically identical
to you who was born yesterday
well you know the best way to raise this
child is to have them smoke marijuana
play video games watch sports on tv
like
what would you do
for someone else what is the good life
you would want other people to lead when
you even have this little bit of
detachment what is the life you want
other people to be leading it's you know
strangely the excuses you make for
yourself
don't come into it you're saying like oh
well i want this child like normally the
way people would respond to that
challenge is i want this child to have
all the advantages i didn't have like
you know you look back at your own
childhood you realize how many hours you
lost playing video games and you realize
well i want to provide this child with a
much better education with a much better
upbringing i want to give them
everything i lacked in this presumably
in this in this intellectual sense you
presumably are not going to focus on
making this child as as self-indulgent
as as humanly possible or you know again
we had the question about brain scans
you're not going to try to give this
child the highest dopamine levels
possible you're going to try to enable
them to lead a meaningful life and to
have all the advantages of what you've
learned you know through through your
own life you know
um
[Music]
you know and and you you can meet people
and there are a lot of stupid people in
the world there are a lot of malicious
people you can meet people who would say
no
um they would instead encourage their
child to play even more video games and
they play themselves their clone their
their identifical twin there are people
who say oh no if they had this child
they'd help them enjoy life even more by
sitting them down on the couch and
saying hey look i've already played
these video games but now you get you
get to use my same video geek like you
get to get stuck into you know the same
video games i enjoy but but you get to
play to be more because when i grew up
my mom would only let me play after i'd
finish my homework but not you kid
because i am you i'm the older version
of you so i know how much you want to
play these video games i'm going to do
your homework for you when you come home
from school
you get to sit and play video games you
get to dribble i'll do the homework
don't worry about it because i know how
much i was you once so i like okay
so you you know you meet someone like
that and then you know you can have a
further degree of of estrangement we say
okay
what about a police officer
what kind of person do you want to be
the police officer making life into
death decisions over you what about joe
biden what about george w bush what kind
of education what kind of preparation do
you want those people that and you know
the most terrifying thing in the world
is to live in a society where the police
are drug addicts whether those police
are addicted to cocaine
methamphetamine heroin you know video
games sorry but it's true do you want a
police officer do you want a governor do
you want a dictator do you want a
president do you want a prime minister
uh who's living that unexamined life and
if not who
who do you want to have power over you
sometimes the power of life and death
making these terrible decisions oh well
i want someone who's totally sober
highly intellectual devoted to the life
of the mind someone who has read
aristotle and thucydides and someone who
oh yeah we talk about this a lot
learning the lessons of history how are
you going to learn you know
i i hate people on the left i hate left
wingers this oh yeah i'm going to learn
because i've seen an instagram meme
about the milai massacre i've learned
the lessons of history i know what went
wrong in the vietnam war because i saw a
meme about it on instagram or on
facebook and i gave it the thumbs up i
gave it the red heart you know
no if you're going to learn the lessons
of history you have to actually learn
the lessons of history and that may
include
reading an article that criticizes this
book and points out the ways in which
it's wrong by the way it's not just
reading one book or you might read this
and then later you realize the ways in
which this misled you or you know you
maybe realize the way you the way in
which your view of the world was wrong
before you read this book and years
later you might realize the way in which
you were wrong
you know at the time when you had read
this book you know like going through
this process of challenging yourself and
growing oh that's the kind of person i'd
want to be a police officer that's the
kind of person i want to be the
president or the prime minister well
then what do you want to do with
yourself because i hate to tell you this
mateo but if you go to the hospital i
lied to you there is no newborn baby for
you to raise there is not a clone of you
waiting at the hospital if you like you
do not have a twin brother to raise you
don't but you know what you've got is
you
you've got this life you've got this one
person you can control and influence and
you know there may be a small number of
other people who love you enough or
respect you enough that you could really
influence them
also right and then why not hold
yourself to those high standards or
higher you know
i i saw you guys saw this on my channel
too it's a really good video i hope more
people see it but i have this video that
has just a few brief clips
of the police
in miami
miami florida
um
it's called believing in your dreams
colon worse than islam so if you watch
that they're just a few moments of the
police
uh in miami
and i feel so much contempt for these
police and they should i mean
we need to change a lot about policing
in the united states of america but you
know the police are talking to this guy
as if they're gangsters not as if he's a
gangster as if they themselves the
police are trying to sound tough and
intimidating and uneducated they're
trying to sound like their high school
dropouts you know
it's so inappropriate and i mean i know
people normally present this in terms of
racism it doesn't matter if the person
you're talking to is black and it
doesn't matter if they're white
you know don't call him boy
you know call him sir you know you know
or mr stevenson or whatever his name is
you know what i mean like don't call him
boy
don't ins you know it's so
deeply inappropriate what they're doing
and it's in a position in that
particular clip where they do have their
hands on their guns they are
in the midst of using you know deadly
force you know potentially deadly force
you know to to arrest someone you know
it's so deeply inappropriate so watch
that i just watched a short clip of the
police doing this in order to put
together this video since there have
been other times and i've watched
large amounts of police footage and by
the way i have seen footage of police
being courteous and appropriate and hold
themselves to a much higher standard of
kind but like when i look at that i
can't help but feel there is this higher
standard i have to hold the police to
right
but how can i even feel that way how can
i even talk that way if there isn't a
higher standard still to which i hold
myself
right
and that's that's what we're dealing
with as a society on a massive scale and
on an intimate scale is that people are
indulgent of themselves they're
self-indulgent but they're not indulgent
of others they're demanding of others
and they're not not demanding themselves
why
because fundamentally they regard other
human beings in loco parentis they look
at other people as if those other people
are going to take care of them oh police
officer you're the grown-up i'm the
child take care of me oh
doctor psychiatrist psychotherapist you
know take care of me other people will
do my thinking for me other people will
be virtuous for me so i don't have to be
virtuous myself
and the adult perspective on the world
is instead no no homie
it's all on you
nobody is going to be a grown up for you
nobody's if you're growing up instead of
you right like nobody's gonna act on
your behalf nobody's gonna think on your
behalf nobody's gonna solve global
warming on your behalf it's you
and if not you
then who
as soon as you start living that way as
soon as you start thinking that way you
know what you can play video games for
five minutes you can play video games
for five
minutes let me tell you if it's been
half an hour
if it's just been 30 it's gnawing away
at you bro it's no way because you have
better things to do you have and this is
not guilt this is not like catholic
guilt where you imagine there's an angel
judging you where there's a god judging
no no no no no no no no
you have an awareness of a direct
feeling for
your intellectual potential you know
what you could be doing with your brain
positively and productively right now
you feel your potential and you don't
need someone else to criticize you you
know
that you're squandering it
you